# Project Euler questions and notes

## Question 1

If we list all the natural numbers below 10 that are multiples of 3 or 5, we get 3, 5, 6 and 9. The sum of these multiples is 23. Find the sum of all the multiples of 3 or 5 below 1000.

## Question 2

Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous two terms. By starting with 1 and 2, the first 10 terms will be: `1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, ...` By considering the terms in the Fibonacci sequence whose values do not exceed four million, find the sum of the even-valued terms.

**Notes:** The solution to this question needs efficient memory management because the numbers become horrendously large. Trying to create a list of all the numbers, then testing and summing will not cut it. It requires that we generate a number, test, make a sum and then discard as much as possible on the fly.

## Question 3

The prime factors of `13195` are `5, 7, 13 and 29`. What is the largest prime factor of the number `600851475143`?

**Notes:**  Found a function and a slightly optimized version on SO:

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/6800193/what-is-the-most-efficient-way-of-finding-all-the-factors-of-a-number-in-python

Version 2 is better because adding step values keeps us from going through all possible numbers
for even numbers, start at 1 and leap in steps of 1.
for odd numbers, start at 1 and leap in steps of 2. 
No need to waste computation time looking for even factors as they dont exist in an odd number

```python
from functools import reduce
from math import sqrt

def factors_v1(n):
    return set(reduce(list.__add__, 
                ([i, n//i] for i in range(1, int(n**0.5) + 1) if n % i == 0)))

def factors_v2(n):
        step = 2 if n%2 else 1
        return set(reduce(list.__add__,
                    ([i, n//i] for i in range(1, int(sqrt(n))+1, step) if n % i == 0)))
#factors(600851475143)
```

Why square root as the upper limit?

$\sqrt x * \sqrt x = x$. So if the two factors are the same, they're both the square root. If you make one factor bigger, you have to make the other factor smaller. This means that one of the two will always be less than or equal to $\sqrt x$, so you only have to search up to that point to find one of the two matching factors. You can then use $\frac{x}{fac1}$ to get $fac2$.

The reduce(list.__add__, ...) is taking the little lists of [factor1, factor2] and joining them together in one long list.

The $[i, n/i]$ for i in $\text{ range }(1, int(\sqrt n) + 1) \text{ if } n % i == 0$ returns a pair of factors if the remainder when you divide n by the smaller one is zero (it doesn't need to check the larger one too; it just gets that by dividing n by the smaller one.)

The set(...) on the outside is getting rid of duplicates. I think this only happens for perfect squares. For n = 4, this will return 2 twice, so set gets rid of one of them.

sqrt is actually faster than **0.5, but I'll leave it out as it's nice as a self-contained snippet.

## Question 4

A palindromic number reads the same both ways The largest palindrome made from the product of two 2-digit numbers is `9009 = 91 × 99`. Find the largest palindrome made from the product of two 3-digit numbers.

## Question 5

`2520` is the smallest number that can be divided by each of the numbers from 1 to 10 without any remainder. What is the smallest positive number that is evenly divisible by all of the numbers from 1 to 20?

**Notes:** This question simply ask us to find the Lowest Common Multiple (LCM) of numbers 1 thru 20. Simple enough by hand for small numbers. Primary school mathematics.

We will generate prime factors for the numbers involved, then multiply every single prime number we find in the group taking each prime number the highest number of times it occurs in any single composite number

count_prime_factors. I just keep it for future reference. It generates a dictionary showing all the `LCM` of a list of numbers as a count of how many times each prime factor appears

## Question 6

The sum of the squares of the first ten natural numbers is, `12 + 22 + ... + 102 = 385`. The square of the sum of the first ten natural numbers is, `(1 + 2 + ... + 10)2 = 552 = 3025`. Hence the difference between the sum of the squares of the first ten natural numbers and the square of the sum is `3025 − 385 = 2640`. Find the difference between the sum of the squares of the first one hundred natural numbers and the square of the sum.

## Question 7

By listing the first six prime numbers: `2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 13`, we can see that the 6th prime is 13. What is the `10001st` prime number?

**Notes:** Here I'm going to use two properties.

The upper and lower bounds of `nth` prime number. The limits are from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_number_theorem>

${lowerbound} = n * [\log n + ((\log(\log n)) - 1)]$

${upperbound} = n * [\log n + \log(\log n)]$

In checking for primality, I'll only check for divisor using integers from 2 up to $n^{(1/2)}$

I checked from wolfram that the `10000th` prime is `104729`
I still haven't figured out how to get the actual count
I still have to rewrite this algorithm in a way that includes a count of the number of  primes

Finding the nth Prime, from http://www.paul-scott.com/nth-prime.php

This is quite a drawn out process. The best optimisation we can include in this process is found when we consider that each factor has a reciprocal pair. For example, 6n is divided by the pairs (2, 3n) and (3, 2n). The numbers in each pair converge at the square-root of p. Immediately we can reduce the number of checks we need to make by only considering possible factors from 2 to p½.

The missing piece of the puzzle is how primes relate to lower primes. If we consider some integer n, we know what we can express n as a product of its factors. Each of those factors (integers themselves) can equally be expressed as a product of their factors, and so we can express n as the product of factors of its immediate factors. At what point does this end? When the factors are prime. Indeed, any non-prime integer can be expressed solely as the product of prime factors. Therefore, if we know all of the primes less than p and none of them divide into p without remainder, p is also prime.

Algorithm

And so to the solution, in which we wish to find the nth prime number:

1. Iterate over the whole number system, ignoring even numbers greater than 2 (2, 3, 5, 7, …)
2. For each integer, p, check if p is prime:
    
    a. Iterate over the primes already found which are less than the square-root of p
    
    b. For each prime in this set, f, check to see if it is a factor of p:
        i. If f divides p then p is non-prime. Continue from 2 for the next p.
    
    c. If no factors are found, p is prime. Continue to 3.
    
    
3. If p is not the nth prime we have found, add it to the list of primes. Continue from 2 for the next p.
4. Otherwise, p is the nth prime we have found and we should return it.

From http://functions.wolfram.com/NumberTheoryFunctions/Prime/03/01/
prime(10000) = 104729

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_number_theorem

$
lower_bound = n * (log(n) + ((log(log(n))) - 1))\\

upper_bound = n * (log(n) + log(log(n)))
$

## Question 8

The four adjacent digits in the 1000-digit number that have the greatest product are `9 × 9 × 8 × 9 = 5832`. (number to be read from file name `problem-8.txt` Find the thirteen adjacent digits in the 1000-digit number that have the greatest product. What is the value of this product?

## Question 9

A Pythagorean triplet is a set of three natural numbers, `a < b < c`, for which, $a^2 + b^2 = c^2$. For example, $32 + 42 = 9 + 16 = 25 = 52$. There exists exactly one Pythagorean triplet for which $a + b + c = 1000$. Find the product $abc$

## Question 10

The sum of the primes below 10 is `2 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 17`. Find the sum of all the primes below two million.

## Question 11

In the `20×20` grid below, four numbers along a diagonal line have been marked in red. (`problem-11.txt`) The product of these numbers is `26 × 63 × 78 × 14 = 1788696`. What is the greatest product of four adjacent numbers in the same direction (up, down, left, right, or diagonally) in the `20×20` grid?

```python
08 02 22 97 38 15 00 40 00 75 04 05 07 78 52 12 50 77 91 08
49 49 99 40 17 81 18 57 60 87 17 40 98 43 69 48 04 56 62 00
81 49 31 73 55 79 14 29 93 71 40 67 53 88 30 03 49 13 36 65
52 70 95 23 04 60 11 42 69 24 68 56 01 32 56 71 37 02 36 91
22 31 16 71 51 67 63 89 41 92 36 54 22 40 40 28 66 33 13 80
24 47 32 60 99 03 45 02 44 75 33 53 78 36 84 20 35 17 12 50
32 98 81 28 64 23 67 10 26 38 40 67 59 54 70 66 18 38 64 70
67 26 20 68 02 62 12 20 95 63 94 39 63 08 40 91 66 49 94 21
24 55 58 05 66 73 99 26 97 17 78 78 96 83 14 88 34 89 63 72
21 36 23 09 75 00 76 44 20 45 35 14 00 61 33 97 34 31 33 95
78 17 53 28 22 75 31 67 15 94 03 80 04 62 16 14 09 53 56 92
16 39 05 42 96 35 31 47 55 58 88 24 00 17 54 24 36 29 85 57
86 56 00 48 35 71 89 07 05 44 44 37 44 60 21 58 51 54 17 58
19 80 81 68 05 94 47 69 28 73 92 13 86 52 17 77 04 89 55 40
04 52 08 83 97 35 99 16 07 97 57 32 16 26 26 79 33 27 98 66
88 36 68 87 57 62 20 72 03 46 33 67 46 55 12 32 63 93 53 69
04 42 16 73 38 25 39 11 24 94 72 18 08 46 29 32 40 62 76 36
20 69 36 41 72 30 23 88 34 62 99 69 82 67 59 85 74 04 36 16
20 73 35 29 78 31 90 01 74 31 49 71 48 86 81 16 23 57 05 54
01 70 54 71 83 51 54 69 16 92 33 48 61 43 52 01 89 19 67 48
```

## Question 12

The sequence of triangle numbers is generated by adding the natural numbers. So the 7th triangle number would be `1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 = 28`. The first ten terms would be: `1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, 55, ...`

**Notes:** Let us list the factors of the first seven triangle numbers:

```python
 1: 1
 3: 1,3
 6: 1,2,3,6
10: 1,2,5,10
15: 1,3,5,15
21: 1,3,7,21
28: 1,2,4,7,14,28
```

We can see that 28 is the first triangle number to have over five divisors.

What is the value of the first triangle number to have over five hundred divisors?

## Question 13

Work out the first ten digits of the sum of the  following one-hundred 50-digit numbers. (`problem_13.txt`)

## Question 14

The following iterative sequence is defined for the set of positive integers:

$n → n/2 (n is even)$

$n → 3n + 1 (n is odd)$

Using the rule above and starting with 13, we generate the following sequence:

`13 → 40 → 20 → 10 → 5 → 16 → 8 → 4 → 2 → 1`
It can be seen that this sequence (starting at 13 and finishing at 1) contains 10 terms. Although it has not been proved yet (Collatz Problem), it is thought that all starting numbers finish at 1. Which starting number, under one million, produces the longest chain?

NOTE: Once the chain starts the terms are allowed to go above one million.

I could produce a dictionary of collatz sequences in the form `{number : collatz sequence}` and just read numbers off of it.

answer: 837799

## Question 15

**Notes:** https://betterexplained.com/articles/navigate-a-grid-using-combinations-and-permutations/

Transforming the problem into a combination problem is key.

Moving along the top edge and down the rightmost edge gives us path corresponding to "rrrddd" for a 3x3 grid, where r represent a rightward motion and d represent a downward motion.

The problem thus reduces to that of the number of ways of combining the letters "rrrddd"

### Considerations concerning the grid itself

There are two ways of movement: movement to the right; movement downward
But both are indistinguishable, so we could just count all the moves starting with a rightward movement and multiply by 2

$
\text{Number of external edges} = n^2\\
\text{Number of horizontal internal edges} = n.(n-1)\\
\text{Number of vertical internal edges} = n.(n-1)\\
\text{Total number of edges, N} = n^2 + 2n(n-1)\\
\text{}
\text{Starting with rightward motion we can cut off a total of } M = 2n + 1 \text{ edges.}\\
\text{Leaving a total of } n^2 + 2n(n-1) - (2n + 1) \text{ edges}
\\
\\
\text{We can "collapse" a total of } n \text{ vertical grids into a single unit}\\
\text{And a total of } n + 1 \text{ horizontal grids into a single unit}
$

$
2 \text{ by } 2 \text{ grid } \\N = 2^2 + 2.2(2-1) = 12\\ M = 2.2 + 1 = 3\\
3 \text{ by } 3 \text{ grid } \\N = 2^3 + 2.3(3-1) = 24\\ M = 2.3 + 1 = 7\\
4 \text{ by } 4 \text{ grid } \\N = 2^4 + 2.4(4-1) = 40\\ M = 2.4 + 1 = 9\\
$

```python
from itertools import combinations, permutations

path_list = list('rrdd')

path = permutations(path_list, 2)
list(path)

path = combinations(path_list, 2)
list(path)
```


## Question 16

`2^15 = 32768` and the sum of its digits is `3 + 2 + 7 + 6 + 8 = 26`. What is the sum of the digits of the number `2^1000`?
